HUNT THE WUMPUS(TM)
Cartridge Instructions
TI-99/4A 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright © 1980 Texas Instruments Incorporated 
Command Module program and data base contents copyright © 1980 
Texas Instruments Incorporated.
See important warranty information at back of book. 



INTRODUCTION

Deep within a maze of caverns and twisting tunnels lives a creature 
known as the Wumpus. Protected by giant bats and pits of slime, the 
Wumpus feeds on unwary visitors to its cavern.

You are the daring hunter who tracks the Wumpus to its lair! Armed 
with a single arrow, you explore the maze of caverns, searching for 
clues to tell you where the Wumpus is hiding. Once you think you've 
found the Wumpus, you fire your arrow into its cavern. But be careful!
If you choose the wrong cavern, you will be the next victim of the 
Wumpus.

The Hunt the Wumpus Solid State SoftwareTM Command Module combines the
excitement of a hunt with the fun of colorful graphics and lively 
sound effects. With the module plugged into the console of your Texas 
Instruments Home Computer, you can:


*Play each game in a new, randomly generated maze

*Choose a maze based on your own level of skill

*Challenge your powers of deduction, memory, and concentration with 
exciting options you can include in the hunt


The module is also programmed with several convenient features. With a
few simple keystrokes, you can view a map of the maze at the end of 
each game, reselect options for a new game, or begin a new game with 
the same options.



GETTING STARTED

Maze Difficulty

After you select the module, the title sequence for HUNT THE WUMPUS 
begins. At the end of the sequence, you are given a choice of three 
levels of maze difficulty.

This selection list lets you choose the complexity of the maze. As a 
rule of thumb, the approximate number of caverns for each level of 
maze difficulty is as follows: 

EASY MAZE - about 32 caverns 
HARD MAZE - about 24 caverns 
PRO MAZE - about 16 caverns

If you choose a level with fewer caverns, the caverns are connected 
by long, twisting tunnels. This makes it harder for you to find the 
location of the Wumpus and avoid the slime pits. Each curve of a 
tunnel may be an important clue to unexplored areas of the maze, and
you may have to take unavoidable risks to reach the Wumpus.

To select maze difficulty press 1, 2, or 3. A small black Wumpus 
symbol appears to the left of your choice.


Option Selection

Once you select the maze difficulty, a selection list appears with 
four options.

Your choice here decides how much of your exploration is "mapped out" 
on the screen. The four following options are available:

NORMAL - Here, the screen displays a map of all the territory you 
explore as you move through the maze. You can always see the caverns 
and tunnels that you've been through.

BLINDFOLD - The Blindfold option tests your memory by erasing the map 
behind you. Only the cavern or tunnel segment you are in appears on 
the screen.

EXPRESS - The Express option adds a new element of deduction and risk.
As soon as you leave a cavern, you are instantly transported to the 
cavern at the other end of the tunnel. The location of each cavern you
enter appears on the map, but the tunnels do not. This makes exploring 
more of a risk, since you can't tell where a tunnel leads until you 
are already there. It also makes it difficult to retrace your steps, 
because caverns have several openings, and you may not be sure which 
one you came in. Watch your step!

BLINDFOLD AND EXPRESS - This option combines the effects of Options 2 
and 3 to create the game's ultimate challenge. Hunters beware!

Press 1, 2, 3, or 4 to select an option. A black Wumpus symbol appears
to the left of your choice.

Note: During the middle of a game, if you decide that you would like 
to change options, hold down the SHIFT key and press Z. The computer 
returns to the Options list so that you can select a new option. If 
you wish to change both the maze difficulty and the option during a 
game, press SHIFT Z (BACK) twice and reselect as desired. In both 
cases, the computer constructs a new maze, and a new game begins.



AND ON TO THE HUNT!

After you select an option, the computer constructs a hidden maze. The
screen blanks, a bugle call sounds, and the hunt begins.

The game starts in an empty cavern. The blinking figure of a hunter 
appears in this cavern.


Exploring The Maze

You explore the maze by moving the hunter through openings in the maze.
You can move up, down, left, or right by pressing the appropriate 
arrow key on the console keyboard {[UP] (E), [DOWN] (X), [LEFT] (S), 
or [RIGHT] (D)}. Although these are normally shift functions on the 
computer, you don't have to press the SHIFT key to activate the arrow 
keys in this game.

You can also use the Wired Remote Controllers to move through the maze.
Only one of the controllers can be used; the other is inoperative and 
should be set aside. To use the controller, push the lever in the 
direction you wish to move.

The directions in which you can move depend on the openings in the 
maze around the hunter. When inside a cavern, you may move in four 
directions (any one of four tunnel openings). When inside a tunnel, 
you can only move in two directions (either advance or retreat a step).
If you move in a direction where there is no opening, the computer 
sounds a low error tone, and your position in the maze does not change.
With each correct move, the computer gives a high beep, and the hunter 
moves in the direction you pressed. More than one move can be made in 
a direction by holding down the arrow key (or controller lever).

Adding to the excitement of the game is the computer's "wrap-around" 
feature. If you move the hunter off the edge of the maze, it reappears 
at the opposite side. The screen "wraps around" both horizontally and 
vertically to connect all the tunnels and caverns, helping you imagine 
that you are in a three-dimensional maze.

In the HARD and PRO mazes, a tunnel sometimes "wraps around" the screen
several times. A tunnel may "wrap" from one side of the screen to the 
other, or from corner to corner. In the hardest mazes, a "wrap-around"
tunnel may even form a loop that leads you around in circles. When 
this happens, remember that you can always move in two directions. Just
carefully retrace your steps to find your way out of the loop.

SURPRISE! Sometimes a tunnel going out of a cavern loops back into the
same cavern. If you move through a loop when playing with the express 
option, a black looping symbol appears in the cavern, briefly replacing
the figure of the hunter.


Tracking Down The Wumpus

The Wumpus makes its lair in one of the caverns in the maze. You know 
you're getting near the Wumpus when you enter a cavern with bloodspots
(shown on the screen as a large red dot in the cavern). These dots 
appear in all caverns within two caverns of the Wumpus.

In the example below, eight out of the twelve caverns explored by the 
hunter (the figure in the upper right cavern) contain bloodspots (the 
dots inside some of the caverns). The Wumpus is probably somewhere in 
the middle of the eight spotted caverns.

[IMAGE OF CAVERN WITH BLOODSPOTS]

Here's a hunting tip: If you are in a spotted cavern that is connected
to a clear cavern (no red dot), you can explore one cavern further 
before you risk entering the Wumpus' cavern. (That's because all 
caverns within two caverns of the Wumpus have a red dot.)

The trick to finding the Wumpus is to determine which cavern is more 
than two caverns away from all unspotted caverns. That cavern is the 
Wumpus' lair. NEVER enter the Wumpus' lair, or else you lose the game.


Caution! Slime Pit

When you enter a cavern that has green walls instead of blue walls, 
you are approaching a slime pit. Slime pits are vast pools of stagnant 
water that fill a cavern. If you enter a slime pit cavern, you fall in
and lose the game.

Slime pits can usually be avoided, since all caverns within one cavern
of a pit have green walls. But move carefully - there are two slime 
pits in the maze, and sometimes they are right next to each other.

The example below contains two slime pit warnings (shown as caverns 
with black walls) in the lower left area of the maze. The warnings 
indicate that the slime pit is probably located in the lower left 
corner of the maze.

[IMAGE OF CAVERN WITH SLIME PITS]

Sometimes the Wumpus makes its lair in a slime pit. You'll know that 
the Wumpus is located in or near a slime pit if you enter a cavern 
with green walls and a red dot.


Do Not Disturb The Bats

Some of the caverns in the maze are inhabited by very large bats. The 
first time you enter a cavern containing bats, a bat symbol appears in 
the cavern. The bats know that you are there, but they ignore you for 
now.

If you later reenter a cavern with bats, you may disturb them. If you 
do, they pick you up and carry you off to anywhere in the maze...a 
tunnel, a slime pit, the Wumpus' lair, or even the cavern where your 
flight began. Then they choose a new place to live.

The bats may set you in either a mapped or unmapped area of the maze. 
(Remember, if you selected the BLINDFOLD or BLINDFOLD AND EXPRESS 
option, there is no map.) But if the bats drop you in a slime pit or 
the Wumpus' lair, the game is over.

The bats enjoy playing tricks on unwary hunters. Some of their more 
fiendish tricks include placing you in a cavern where slime pits block 
the way, or in a tunnel next to a slime pit or the Wumpus. In the 
latter case, you have no warning of the danger, since tunnels do not 
have red spots or green slime warning signals.

[IMAGE OF CAVERN WITH BATS]

Note that bats can be in a cavern with bloodspots and/or slime (green 
walls). All of the symbols appear, but the bat symbol covers the 
bottom half of the red dot. In the above example, the hunter has 
"discovered" two caverns with bats. The cavern on the far right only
contains bats, while the cavern in the upper left contains both bats 
and a red dot.


Once The Wumpus Is Located

When you think you know where the Wumpus is, it's time to fire your 
arrow. (You should be in a cavern or tunnel that connects to the 
Wumpus' lair.) Press Q to indicate that you are ready to fire. The 
hunter figure turns from yellow to blue. Then press an arrow key to 
direct the arrow into the tunnel that you think leads to the Wumpus. 
The arrow follows the tunnel to the next cavern.

When using the Wired Remote Controllers, press the FIRE button to 
indicate that you are ready to shoot. Then move the lever in the 
direction you wish to fire the arrow.

If the cavern you fire into is the Wumpus' lair, you win! If you are 
wrong, the Wumpus hears the arrow and comes looking for you. You only 
have one arrow, so if you miss you lose the game.

Note: If you change your mind and decide not to shoot after you've 
pressed Q (or the controller FIRE button), hold down the SHIFT key and
press R. The hunter turns from blue back to yellow, and you can then 
continue to explore the maze. Once the arrow has been fired, however, 
pressing SHIFT R will have no effect.



AT THE HUNT'S END

The hunt is over when you fire your arrow, fall into a slime pit, or 
enter the Wumpus' lair. If you win, the screen says GOT IT! and a 
fanfare plays. If you fall into a slime pit, the screen shows the 
hunter figure falling, followed by the word PIT. If the Wumpus wins, 
you see its teeth close while a funeral march plays. Then the display 
shows a message about the outcome of the hunt and a tally board of the 
scores for this round of games:

The tally board contains three scores:

*The number of times you have "gotten" the Wumpus, next to the yellow 
hunter symbol. 

*The number of times the Wumpus "got" you, next to the red Wumpus 
symbol.

*The number of pits you have fallen into, next to the green pit symbol.


The display also offers you these four options:

1. Press Q (or the FIRE button on the Wired Remote Controller) to look
at a complete map of the game that just ended. The map indicates the 
location of the Wumpus' lair with a small red Wumpus symbol. Slime 
pits are green and contain a solid green circle. The map also shows 
the most recent location of the bats.

(Note: In the more difficult mazes, there may be sections of the map 
you can't reach. In such cases, the computer begins the hunt in a 
section of the map containing the Wumpus)

2. Press [UP] (or move the lever of the Wired Remote Controller 
upwards) to start a new game immediately. A new maze is constructed on 
the same level of difficulty as the previous one, and the same options
are in effect.

3. Hold down the SHIFT key and press Z (BACK) to choose a different 
level of difficulty or new options. The computer returns to the Maze 
Difficulty selection list.

4. Hold down the SHIFT key and press Q (QUIT) to end this round of 
games and erase all scores from the tally board. The computer returns 
to the master title screen.